---
title: "What does Fast-Trips do differently?"
author: Elizabeth
image: /img/posts/kingctydoor.jpg
comments: true
layout: post
tags: [features]
images:
   image1:
      image: /img/posts/lumpy-rt-choice.png
      caption: "Ignoring individual variation makes transit choices unrealistically lumpy"
      source: "MTC, PSRC, & SFCTA"
   image2:
      image: /img/posts/less-lumpy-rt-choice.png
      caption: "Fast-Trips considers spectrum of perceptions about the route"
      source: "MTC, PSRC, & SFCTA"
   image3:
      image: /img/posts/mkt-segments.png
      caption: "Fast-Trips reveals that different services are important for different people"
      source: "MTC, PSRC, & SFCTA"
   image4:
      image: /img/posts/diversity.png
      caption: "Fast-Trips doesn't assume that everybody is average."
      source: "MTC, PSRC, & SFCTA"
   image5:
      image: /img/posts/indy-vehicles.png
      caption: "Fast-Trips can capture that rider experience can vary greatly across individual vehicles during the same time period"
      source: "MTC, PSRC, & SFCTA"
   image6:
      image: /img/posts/rider-perspectives.png
      caption: "Fast-Trips can show the variety of experiences riders feel at the same time on the same vehicle"
      source: "MTC, PSRC, & SFCTA"  
   image7:
      image: /img/posts/muni-downtown.png
      caption: "Fast-Trips can show variation in experiences across riders"
      source: "MTC, PSRC, & SFCTA" 
   image8:
      image: /img/posts/q-level.png
      caption: ""
      source: "" 
   image9:
      image: /img/posts/q-reliability.png
      caption: ""
      source: "" 
   image10:
      image: /img/posts/q-reliability2.png
      caption: ""
      source: "" 
   image11:
      image: /img/posts/q-rtchoice.png
      caption: ""
      source: ""
   image12:
      image: /img/posts/q-space.png
      caption: ""
      source: ""
   image13:
      image: /img/posts/q-stop-consolidation.png
      caption: ""
      source: ""
   image14:
      image: /img/posts/q-xfer.png
      caption: ""
      source: ""
---

A question we understandably get a lot is "what is so different about Fast-Trips compared to
what you do now?"  The generic answer [ for most model development projects] is that it 
helps us answer important questions relevant to planners and decision-makers that we can't 
answer now.  Realizing that the lack of specificity in this response leaves a little to be
desired, we thought we would dedicate a post to diving a little deeper:  
* what are the specific features that differentiate it from the conventional process?  
* what questions will in answer?  

### Promising Characteristics of Fast-Trips  

#### Heterogeneity of riders.  

##### What does that really mean?  

Fast-Trips uses simulation, which enables it to consider the spectrum of unique combinations
of why riders might choose one route over another.  It has the ability to know that some riders
might prefer shorter walking distances and seats while others will prefer the fastest possible route.

{% include image.html image=page.images.image4 %}

Furthermore, rather than grouping every individual into a category ("market segment") that 
chooses based on the average desire of the people in that category (i.e. all the speed-demons
will pick the 38L despite there not being any seats), Fast-Trips has the ability to understand
that "speedy" is relative - and that some speed-demons are more speed-driven than others (i.e.
some might be okay with a trip that is a minute slower, but where you can get a seat to read
your book.

<!--break-->

Conversely, different types of riders affect the transit system in different ways.  Some are
slow to board, some use cash versus a fare-card which makes the bus stop for longer, some 
may need a spot for their wheelchair.  All of these things affect the performance of the 
transit line.

##### How is that different?
Conventional transit path building methods use a singular set of optimization parameters 
for all transit riders.  The problem with this method is that it results in an all-or-nothing
assignment of everybody going between that general origin-destination pair to a singular transit
route.  

{% include image.html image=page.images.image1 %}

{% include image.html image=page.images.image2 %}

##### Why do we care?  

**More consistent with reality:**  It is what happens in real life; therefore you will 
get more realistic sensitivities and results.

**Realistic sensitivities and results:**  Aside from the simplification of theory, this 
can be a significant problem in practice because transit routes that are slightly different
 from each other can have vastly different levels of attractiveness to riders.  

If you want to design a system that works for everybody - you can't assume everybody will
be well-served by a system optimized for the "average" citizen.

{% include image.html image=page.images.image3 %}

#### Detailed representation of individual people and vehicles over time  

##### What does that really mean?  
Fast-trips tracks individual transit vehicles and people as they move through space and time. 
 The overflowing 38L bus that arrives at Masonic Blvd. at 8:32 AM is represented separately 
 from the bus that arrives at 8:35 AM and has free seats. 

Similarly, Fast-Trips can show that individual riders may have different experiences on the 
same vehicle.  If you are the person who got a seat, you will feel very differently about
your trip than the person who got passed-up or is squished near the door.

{% include image.html image=page.images.image2 %}  s

##### How is that different?   
Conventional transit path building models use aggregations of time periods, vehicles, and riders.  
This means that they cannot capture variations in experiences across vehicles or riders which makes
it difficult or impossible to calculate variables such as reliability or capture issues such
as pass-ups or crowding.

{% include image.html image=page.images.image5 %}

Furthermore, because conventional transit models do not have a concept of an individual rider,
you cannot easily summarize a rider's experience across the entire system (critical for 
capturing reliability from the rider's perspective) or calculate "select links."

##### Why do we care?  

**Capture important phenomena:** such as crowding, reliability, and the scheduling of 
infrequent transit lines.  Since Fast-Trips models individual riders, you can observe the distribution 
 of experiences rather than the average experience.

{% include image.html image=page.images.image7 %}

**Infinite summary options:** including select links, tracking individual people or vehicles,
and analyzing how specific groups of people or vehicles perform.  This includes the ability 
to analyze reliability from the rider *and* vehicle perspective.

### What are some questions Fast-Trips will be help us answer?

{% include image.html image=page.images.image8 %}
{% include image.html image=page.images.image9 %}
{% include image.html image=page.images.image10 %}
{% include image.html image=page.images.image11 %}
{% include image.html image=page.images.image12 %}
{% include image.html image=page.images.image13 %}





